privacy-anti-patterns.md, before:

Privacy Anti-Patterns in Standards
===

The Web suffers from large scale, frequent, and often invisible privacy
violations.  These pervasive privacy problems threaten the Web's ability to
serve as a preeminent application platform and information distribution system.

[W3C's Privacy Interest Group](https://www.w3.org/Privacy/IG/) (PING) has been seeing several patterns in web
standards that are harmful to Web Privacy.  Though each of these occur in
many (many!) standards, we're intentionally *not* calling out or shaming any
specific standards; instead, the goal is to
demonstrate frequently recurring problems, to explain why
they are harmful to the goal of a privacy-respecting Web, and to provide
guidelines for how future standards can be designed to better respect privacy.


### 1. Strictly Defined Functionality, Loosely-Defined Protections
Many standards strictly describe functionality that browser vendors should
implement, but are very loose or vague about the mitigations browsers should
deploy to protect users from possible privacy harms. In extreme cases,
standards will have many pages of text describing, in precise language,
how new functionality will work, followed by a paragraph or two saying,
"implementers can vary from the standard at any time to protect user privacy."

While well meaning, patterns like the above (strictly defined functionality,
loosely-defined protections) are harmful to Web privacy for several reasons.

First, though it might seem that weakly/broadly-defined mitigations maximize
implementer flexibility in protecting user privacy, the opposite ends up
being true; weakly defined mitigations make it extremely difficult to protect
user privacy; websites end up assuming the presence of defined functionality,
and privacy-oriented implementers end up with unmanageable compatibility
problems if they alter the behavior of these privacy-harming, but expected
features.

Second, this pattern boils down to a "punt" on dealing with the privacy
risks of the new functionality. In some cases this is because future standards
are expected to address the current harm (bad!), in other cases because
there is no commonly agreed-to solution for dealing with the harm (bad!), and
in yet other cases it is because the standards authors believe the benefits of
the new functionality outweigh the privacy harms.  In all cases, the end
result is additional privacy risk to a platform already struggling
with tremendous privacy problems.

#### Solution
Standards should define privacy protections as carefully and precisely as they
define new functionality.  Once functionality hits the Web, it is extremely
difficult to change its behavior or roll it back.  Protections need to be
specific, as mandatory as the defined behavior, and defined from day one to
protect Web privacy.


### 2. Uncommon Use Cases, Global Availability
A second privacy-harming pattern we see in Web standards is the
over-availability of new functionality; powerful new functionality aimed at
niche use-cases, being made globally available (e.g. third-party code,
third-party frames, without permission prompt, user gesture, or user
notification, etc). Many of these powerful new browser capabilities end up
being beneficial to users on only a small number of websites, but leveraged
for [passive](https://panopticlick.eff.org)
[fingerprinting](https://browserleaks.com) on a large number of websites.

This pattern of leveraging powerful-but-rarely-used functionality for
user identification (instead of its intended, user-serving purposes) can
be observed in [popular user-tracking (e.g. privacy violating)
tools](https://github.com/Valve/fingerprintjs2) and the changes
[privacy-focused](https://2019.www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser/design/)
[implementers](https://github.com/brave/brave-browser/wiki/Deviations-from-Chromium-(features-we-disable-or-remove))
need to make to keep their users private.

We emphasize that we don't think that this new functionality isn't useful;
it is! We only mean to highlight that it's also dangerous to privacy, and
should be treated as such.

#### Solution
Websites should not globally be able to access rarely needed
functionality, functionality aimed at very specific, uncommon use cases.
Instead, websites should be only be allowed to use powerful new features
when accessed from privileged positions (e.g. first-party code running
in a first party context, but not third-party frames, etc.) or when users
have given a clear signal that they desire the additional functionality (e.g.
a permission prompt, a user gesture, etc.).

The specific "gating" mechanisms will vary from case to case (and thus is
beyond the scope of this blog post), but almost any "gating" is better than
global access. Increasing the power of the Web, while improving user privacy,
requires keeping rarely needed functionality rarely available.

### 3. "No Worse Than The Status Quo"
A third privacy-harming anti-pattern in Web standards concerns the bar
standards authors use when introducing new privacy-risking
functionality. Frequently standards authors start from the position that new
standards should not make Web privacy worse than its current (poor) state.
As a result, standards are created that replicate existing privacy harms,
through new end points or locations. This is extremely harmful for Web privacy.

Even just replicating sensitive, or user identifying, information
in new locations makes future mitigation more difficult.  Instead of needing
to fix or remove one privacy harming feature from the Web (already extremely
difficult), browser vendors need to untangle twice as many expected features
from the Web. Just replicating existing fingerprinting surface amounts to
further technical debt that we in the privacy community need to pay down.

#### Solution
New standards should treat all additional privacy risk as
problematic. The appropriate measure for new standards isn't "marginal
increase in privacy risk"; it is "could the functionality in the standard
be used to harm user privacy." Put differently, when you find you're digging
yourself into a hole, the first thing to do is to stop digging. The Web is
already rife with difficult privacy problems, new standards should not entrench
the problem further.


The Importance of Privacy in Standards
---
The goal in this post is to highlight the critical role standards play in
protecting privacy on the Web, and thus confidence in the Web platform general
generally. Web standards can either help build a "private by default" platform
we can be proud of, or Web standards can normalize privacy-harming
functionality and hope that implementers will mutate, violate and deviate from
those standards to keep users protected.

The three anti-patterns described play a significant part in how
the Web wound up in its current problematic, frequently privacy-harming state.
Fixing these anti-patterns is a necessary part of building a humane, privacy
respecting Web.



What is the W3C Privacy Interest Group (aka PING)
---

W3C's [Privacy Interest Group](https://www.w3.org/Privacy/IG/) has the
the mission of improving privacy in Web standards so that Web users can be
more confident that using the Web won't put their privacy at risk.

PING tries to improve web privacy in several ways, including:

* reviewing newly proposed standards to remove, modify or restrict privacy
  threating features.
* revising existing standards to improve the privacy-properties of existing
  functionality.
* developing and sharing [guidelines for standards authors](https://www.w3.org/TR/security-privacy-questionnaire/),
  so that future additions to the Web platform can be designed to be
  private-by-default.

Commit message:

change global availability to first veruss third party

privacy-anti-patterns.md, after:

Privacy Anti-Patterns in Standards
===

The Web suffers from large scale, frequent, and often invisible privacy
violations.  These pervasive privacy problems threaten the Web's ability to
serve as a preeminent application platform and information distribution system.

[W3C's Privacy Interest Group](https://www.w3.org/Privacy/IG/) (PING) has been seeing several patterns in web
standards that are harmful to Web Privacy.  Though each of these occur in
many (many!) standards, we're intentionally *not* calling out or shaming any
specific standards; instead, the goal is to
demonstrate frequently recurring problems, to explain why
they are harmful to the goal of a privacy-respecting Web, and to provide
guidelines for how future standards can be designed to better respect privacy.


### 1. Strictly Defined Functionality, Loosely-Defined Protections
Many standards strictly describe functionality that browser vendors should
implement, but are very loose or vague about the mitigations browsers should
deploy to protect users from possible privacy harms. In extreme cases,
standards will have many pages of text describing, in precise language,
how new functionality will work, followed by a paragraph or two saying,
"implementers can vary from the standard at any time to protect user privacy."

While well meaning, patterns like the above (strictly defined functionality,
loosely-defined protections) are harmful to Web privacy for several reasons.

First, though it might seem that weakly/broadly-defined mitigations maximize
implementer flexibility in protecting user privacy, the opposite ends up
being true; weakly defined mitigations make it extremely difficult to protect
user privacy; websites end up assuming the presence of defined functionality,
and privacy-oriented implementers end up with unmanageable compatibility
problems if they alter the behavior of these privacy-harming, but expected
features.

Second, this pattern boils down to a "punt" on dealing with the privacy
risks of the new functionality. In some cases this is because future standards
are expected to address the current harm (bad!), in other cases because
there is no commonly agreed-to solution for dealing with the harm (bad!), and
in yet other cases it is because the standards authors believe the benefits of
the new functionality outweigh the privacy harms.  In all cases, the end
result is additional privacy risk to a platform already struggling
with tremendous privacy problems.

#### Solution
Standards should define privacy protections as carefully and precisely as they
define new functionality.  Once functionality hits the Web, it is extremely
difficult to change its behavior or roll it back.  Protections need to be
specific, as mandatory as the defined behavior, and defined from day one to
protect Web privacy.


### 2. No differentiation between first and third parties
A second privacy-harming pattern we see in Web standards is the
over-availability of new functionality; powerful new functionality aimed at
niche use-cases, being made available to first and third parties without
distinction (e.g. third-party code, third-party frames, without permission
prompt, user gesture, or user notification, etc). Many of these powerful
new browser capabilities end up being beneficial to users on only a small
number of websites in a first party context, but end up being leveraged
for [passive](https://panopticlick.eff.org)
[fingerprinting](https://browserleaks.com) on a large number of websites by
third parties.

This pattern of leveraging powerful-but-rarely-used functionality for
user identification (instead of its intended, user-serving purposes) can
be observed in [popular user-tracking (e.g. privacy violating)
tools](https://github.com/Valve/fingerprintjs2) and the changes
[privacy-focused](https://2019.www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser/design/)
[implementers](https://github.com/brave/brave-browser/wiki/Deviations-from-Chromium-(features-we-disable-or-remove))
need to make to keep their users private.

We emphasize that we don't think that this new functionality isn't useful;
it is! We only mean to highlight that it's also dangerous to privacy, and
should be treated as such by limiting its functionality to the first party
providing the experience as opposed to all parties on a page.

#### Solution
Functionality should be aimed at very specific, uncommon use cases that are
typically served by the first party domain, rather than being available to
all parties by default. Websites should be only be allowed to use powerful new
features when accessed from privileged positions (e.g. first-party code running
in a first party context, but not third-party frames, etc.) or when users
have given a clear signal that they desire the additional functionality (e.g.
a permission prompt, a user gesture, etc.).

The specific "gating" mechanisms will vary from case to case (and thus is
beyond the scope of this blog post), but almost any "gating" is better than
not distinguishing between first and third party access. Increasing the power
of the Web, while improving user privacy, requires keeping rarely needed
functionality rarely available.

### 3. "No Worse Than The Status Quo"
A third privacy-harming anti-pattern in Web standards concerns the bar
standards authors use when introducing new privacy-risking
functionality. Frequently standards authors start from the position that new
standards should not make Web privacy worse than its current (poor) state.
As a result, standards are created that replicate existing privacy harms,
through new end points or locations. This is extremely harmful for Web privacy.

Even just replicating sensitive, or user identifying, information
in new locations makes future mitigation more difficult.  Instead of needing
to fix or remove one privacy harming feature from the Web (already extremely
difficult), browser vendors need to untangle twice as many expected features
from the Web. Just replicating existing fingerprinting surface amounts to
further technical debt that we in the privacy community need to pay down.

#### Solution
New standards should treat all additional privacy risk as
problematic. The appropriate measure for new standards isn't "marginal
increase in privacy risk"; it is "could the functionality in the standard
be used to harm user privacy." Put differently, when you find you're digging
yourself into a hole, the first thing to do is to stop digging. The Web is
already rife with difficult privacy problems, new standards should not entrench
the problem further.


The Importance of Privacy in Standards
---
The goal in this post is to highlight the critical role standards play in
protecting privacy on the Web, and thus confidence in the Web platform general
generally. Web standards can either help build a "private by default" platform
we can be proud of, or Web standards can normalize privacy-harming
functionality and hope that implementers will mutate, violate and deviate from
those standards to keep users protected.

The three anti-patterns described play a significant part in how
the Web wound up in its current problematic, frequently privacy-harming state.
Fixing these anti-patterns is a necessary part of building a humane, privacy
respecting Web.



What is the W3C Privacy Interest Group (aka PING)
---

W3C's [Privacy Interest Group](https://www.w3.org/Privacy/IG/) has the
the mission of improving privacy in Web standards so that Web users can be
more confident that using the Web won't put their privacy at risk.

PING tries to improve web privacy in several ways, including:

* reviewing newly proposed standards to remove, modify or restrict privacy
  threating features.
* revising existing standards to improve the privacy-properties of existing
  functionality.
* developing and sharing [guidelines for standards authors](https://www.w3.org/TR/security-privacy-questionnaire/),
  so that future additions to the Web platform can be designed to be
  private-by-default.
